---
author: Allan Jude <allanjude@freebsd.org>,
    George V. Neville-Neil <gnn@neville-neil.com>,
    Benno Rice <benno@jeamland.net>
state: draft
---

<!--
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

	Copyright 2017 <gnn@neville-neil.com>
    Copyright 2017 <allanjude@freebsd.org>
    Copyright 2017 <benno@jeamland.net>
-->

# FCP 0: FreeBSD Community Proposal Process and Authoring Guide

Requests for Discussion are an idea originally promulgated by Joyent
and based on the work with Requests for Comments, originating with the
IETF.  The FreeBSD project has adopted a similar model of discussion and
collaboration to facilitate major changes to the code or community of the
project.

Unlike RFCs from the IETF, our FCPs are maintained in Markdown format
which provides more formal formatting structure and is also a
format that is broadly used in the open source community.

If you are unfamiliar with the IETF's Request for Comments (RFC)
system please read [RFC 3](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3).

FCPs also use the IETF interpretations of the keywords "MUST", "MUST
NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" as defined in
[RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

The rest of this FCP documents why and how to write an FCP.

## When should I write an FCP?

The purpose of the FCP process is to document the design decisions behind
proposed changes and to gather feedback from the many different types of users
that make up the FreeBSD Community, to better understand how each change will
impact those users.

An FCP MUST be written when:
* Any change that lacks consensus or is contended.
* Creating, changing or removing a feature that is likely to astonish a user
  (POLA).
* Breaking changes to the behaviour of existing commands or libraries.
* Substantive change to the behaviour or function of the ports or packaging
  system.
* Major changes to how people interact with the FreeBSD Community.
* A change that is proposed or committed which results in significant
  objections should use the FCP process to come to a resolution.

Every FCP MUST have a title that is a simple synopsis of the document. Titles
are not fixed; FCPs are numbered to allow the title to change.  An FCP SHOULD
address the following questions:

##### Title

This is a simple synopsis of the document. Note, the title is not fixed. It may
change as the FCP evolves.

##### What is the problem you're trying to solve?

The classic question for anyone who wants to change or enhance an existing
system.  The problem you're trying to solve is the goal you wish to achieve,
whether it's a new feature, a change to an existing one, or the removal of an
ambiguity in how the system works.

##### How will users interact with these new or changed features?

You MUST consider all users of the system, and not just a specific
itch that you wish to scratch.  How will this change affect users?
How will it affect existing scripts or other integrations with the system?
How will it impact programs that link against libraries in the base system.
You MUST also consider how these changes might affect those who have
built products on top of FreeBSD.

##### List the public private interfaces that are changing.

If a public interface, such as a command line program or its
arguments, a library, or a syscall, is to be changed then list it here along
with a brief, 1 or 2 line, description of the intended change.

Changes to private interfaces, those consumed by other internal parts
of FreeBSD MUST also be listed with a similarly brief description of
the intended change.

##### What is the upgrade impact?

What are the implications to current users of FreeBSD if they upgrade
their systems to a newer version that includes this change? Can the change be
merged to the stable branch? Any such changes MUST be added to the UPDATING
file in the main FreeBSD repository.

##### What is the security impact?

What (untrusted) user input (including both data and code) will be made visible
to the system as part of the change?  Which components will interact with that
input?  How will that input be validated and managed securely?  What new or
changed privileges will your feature require?  How can the new code be
sandboxed?  How might an attacker use the proposed facilities to escalate their
privileges?

## Mechanics of an FCP

To create a new FCP, you MUST take the following steps.

### Allocate a new FCP number

FCPs are numbered starting at 100. The first 100 FCPs, including this one, are
reserved for documenting the processes of the FreeBSD Project. When you start,
you MUST allocate the next currently unused number. Note that if someone
commits a new FCP to the repository before you, then you MUST just increase
your number to the next available one. If, the next FCP would be number 314,
then you should use 0314 and place it in the file fcp-0314.md. Note, that while
we use four digits in the numbering, when referring to an FCP, you do not need
to use the leading zeros.

```
$ svn update
$ cp FCP/templates/template.md FCP/drafts/FCP-0314.md
$ svn add FCP/drafts/FCP-0314.md
$ svn commit
```

### Write the FCP

FCPs MUST have a default text width of 80 characters. Any other materials
related to an FCP SHOULD be named FCP-XXXX-file-name.type such as
FCP-0314-example-code.c.

#### FCP Metadata and State

Every FCP document starts with a brief amount of metadata in the
[python-markdown2](https://github.com/trentm/python-markdown2/wiki/metadata)
metadata format which looks like this:

```
---
authors: Committer Name <committer@freebsd.org>,
    Collaborator Name <collaborator@example>
state: draft
---
```

Only the `authors`, and the `state` are tracked.  There MAY be any number of
`authors`, they MUST be listed with their name and e-mail address for proper
attribution.

An FCP can be in one of the following states:

1. draft
1. feedback
1. vote
1. accepted
1. rejected
1. withdrawn

An FCP is first created in the `draft` state. Before publicizing the FCP to the
mailing lists, author(s) are encouraged to contact fcp-editors@freebsd.org for
editorial review. Once the draft is ready, it moves to the `feedback` state,
and is published to the fcp@freebsd.org mailing list, and CCd to the
appropriate technical lists.

The `feedback` state is where all discussion of the FCP takes place.
Developers and users will provide feedback on the design of the proposed
feature, and its impact on their use of FreeBSD. Many FCPs will eventually have
code attached to them, for both review and testing.

When the discussion of a change has come to a suitable and acceptable close it
SHOULD be updated to the `vote` state.

At this time the FreeBSD Core Team will vote on the subject of the FCP. The
result of vote moves the FCP into the `accepted` or `rejected` state.

Just because something is in the `accepted` state does not mean that it cannot
be updated and corrected. See the "Touching up" section for more information.

At any time the author(s) may decide to withdraw an FCP. If an FCP is not
viable or if an FCP must be ignored, it can be moved into the `withdrawn`
state.

### Start the discussion

Once the author(s) have reached a point where they're ready to discuss their
thoughts they MUST first push the latest changes to the repository and then
send an e-mail to the mailing list announcing the FCP.

The subject of the message MUST be the FCP number and synopsis. For example, if
your FCP number 314 with the title Addition of new mbuf subroutines, then the
subject would be `FCP 314: FreeBSD Change Request Process and Authoring Guide`.

Make sure to include a link to the FCP in the body of the email.

### Finishing up

When discussion has wrapped up and the relevant feedback has been incorporated,
then you change the state of the document to `vote` state, and send a
notification to core@freebsd.org. Core will then hold a vote. The core
secretary will announce the decision,  and the FCP document will be moved out
of the `drafts` directory.

### Changes after publishing

FCPs may need to be revised after they have been moved into the `accepted`
state.  If the changes are minor then you SHOULD update the FCP but if they the
changes are major you SHOULD withdraw the current FCP and start a new one.
